---
layout: post
title:  "Journey to Coder #1: Why coding"
date:   2017-09-07 21:56:26 +0000
---


    After graduating high school, I had many ideas of what I wanted to do with my life, and none were very promising. From a stint as a glassblower, to several retail jobs, to an eventual cross-country move (from my native New Jersey to unfamiliar San Francisco), I experienced alot in a few short years. Eventually, I learned what most people do: having money is nice, and a college degree is the best way to earn it. So, I enrolled in City College of San Francisco. I had never liked formal schooling, and wanted to spend as little time in the "system" as possible, so I majored in engineering, thinking that I could earn an associates and use it almost as a vocational degree, finding work as an engineering technician or some other such thing. But, something unexpected happened soon after: I discovered an intense passion for problem solving, and, to my greatest surprise, mathematics! I promise I never thought I would say those words as an adolescent, but my least-favorite subject in my school years had become intensely fascinating to me in my maturity. As I progressed through my engineering coursework, I began doing research into the various sub-disciplines I might enjoy, and the types of jobs I might hold upon graduating. 
		I took chemistry classes and loved them, same with physics, and same, of course, with math. It shocked me how these deeply technical subjects that had given me nightmares just a few short years earlier now occupied so much of my mental space, but I was not and am not one to look a gift horse in the mouth. However, as I continued researching the various occupations in the engineering world, and particularly my adopted home, the bay area, two things became increasingly clear to me: 1. All of the most interesting and contemporary jobs tend toward the software end of the engineering spectrum and 2. Almost ALL jobs in engineering nowadays are either based in software or involve far more software than they once did. Slowly, I began to realize that perhaps my interests would be best applied not as a chemical engineer, a mechanical engineer, a materials scientist, or in any of the other scores of fields I had considered, but in software. This surprised me even further, since I had never coded before and figured I must be too late to the party. After all, there were already many talented programmers out there, including some who had been doing it as a hobby for years, and it would be downright ignorant to think that I could reach their level or anywhere near it in a short time. Right? 
		Nonetheless, living in the technology capital of the universe, I continually met people who did or attempted to do just that: go from zero coding experience to competitive and employable developers as adults. I decided that, regardless of my career path, learning some fundamental coding could not hurt, so I started doing some tutorials over my school break. At the risk of sounding too cliche, I soon realized why all of these people took to coding: it was downright addicting! It combined everything I loved about the other technical subjects: analytical thinking, problem-solving, a deeply involved community, and a language all its own, with true creativity, the ability to build useful things at home, and yes, the potential for $$$. I was quickly hooked, and knew that, late or not, I was ready to learn coding for real.
