---
layout: post
title:      "Techno-Education"
date:       2017-11-28 19:12:09 -0500
permalink:  techno-education
---


   I can vividly recall the first time I was awed by a piece of technology. I was in eigth grade, the iphone was extant but still far too expensive to be ubiquitous, and I was probably sporting some kind of LG flip phone. But the first time I saw a commercial for the original Motorola Droid, I immediately knew in some infantile way that I was looking at the future. At first, the ad fooled me into thinking it was for a film or video game. Intrigued enough to look into it, I soon discovered that it was in fact a phone, but not like any phone I had ever seen. Sleek, minimalist, and captivating, the 5.0 megapixel camera, bare-bones android software, and slide-out keyboard captured my imagination in a way that Apple's simplistic marketing never could. 
		I had never been the type of kid with a long holiday wishlist, so I knew that convincing my parents to indulge me in this new toy would not be especially difficult. Sure enough, by the time the season rolled around, they were willing to shell out the  modest up-front cost and $30 monthly charge that in those days got one unlimited data, before the networks realized they had a gold-mine on their hands. I unboxed it, and as soon as it powered on and said its name ("Drooooooooiiiiiiiiiiiid") in its characteristically robotic voice, I knew my suspicions had been correct: this was not just a phone, it was an entirely new way of life. 
		As I played around with a proprietary Google Maps, several games from what was then called the Android Market, and various other features that seemed revolutionary at the time, I began to feel that what I now possessed was, truly, a cure for boredom. Wherever I might happen to be, whatever activity I might be involved in, I now possessed a completely portable device that could transport me somewhere else, keep me endlessly informed and entertained, and connect me at all times to a vast network of people. 
		I was an early adopter of the smartphone, indeed, there was probably at least a year or so when I had this technological marvel for a phone and most of my friends and family still had a basic flip phone. As I watched more and more people adopt the lifestyle I was already accustomed to, I learned some early lessons about the technology industry. First and foremost, it matters who has what. I was never the loudest or most outgoing kid, but still, people soon knew that I had a smartphone, and they wanted to play with it. However, I was not the type to be a trendsetter, and nobody was going to go out and buy a Motorola Droid because I owned one. But when, say, the captain of the football team bought one, suddenly, much like Drake can immediately influence sales for a pair of sunglasses, or Kevin Durant for a pair of shoes, it was a middle-school must have.  Techno-lesson number 1. Marketing matters. Who has what matters. 
		As the smartphone industry ballooned, two main players developed, and they were, of course, Android and Apple. In the early days, based on my small, microcosmic experience, I can say that their market shares must have been roughly equal. For every Iphone user I knew, there was a Droid user. But as apps like imessage, facetime, and siri emerged, the balance began to tip dramatically. This marked techno-lesson number 2, and the most important one I have learned to date. Simple, easy-to-sink-your-teeth-into, marketable, and above-all SOCIAL features win over users. I still stick firmly to the android hardware and software that won my heart, but I am firmly in the minority eight years later. 
		None of these early experiences with technology "made me want to be an engineer" or "cemented my path." But they did introduce me, slowly, to the ideas, strategies, and tools that would eventually engulf so much of my time and thought-energy. As my technology education continues, I still bear in mind the lessons I learned from my first smartphone, even as I seek to build has_many through relationships and seed databases.
